#Behavioural Economics: Libertarian Paternalism and Public Health
![[]{data-label="fig:example"}](libertarian_paternalism_copia.jpg)


---
by
    Yvonne Jamar,  Carolina Oliveira, Florian Schmidt,
    Zeynep Tanca, Sandra van der Schaaf and Francesca Ventimiglia.

---


*Public health is a matter of great concern for politicians and
legislators around the world: not only does it take up a relevant slice
of a nation’s public budget, but it also deeply affects its citizens
quality of life. The behavioural economics approach of libertarian
paternalism largely contributes to the already substantial literature on
this matter. In the following canon, we give an overview of the
aforementioned contributions by presenting the most important examples
of practical applications. These include experiments on nudging people
towards healthier lifestyles as well as articles on better schemes for
organ donation and topics as the improvement of hygiene in hospitals.*

Introduction 
============


How can we make people quit smoking? Which way is the best to increase
the number of organ donors? Why are so many people unable to cope with
choices concerning their health – and is it possible to improve their
decisions? These questions are just a few out of many politicians and
health managers permanently face when considering new regulations and
policies regarding the system of public health. Doubtlessly, there are
plenty of ways to answer them. The paper at hand tries to give an
insight how the approach of Behavioural Economics and Libertarian
Paternalism can help to deal with these issues.

Libertarian Paternalism is a term introduced by US economists Richard
Thaler and law professor Cass Sunstein in their well-known bestseller
“Nudge – Improving decisions about health, wealth and happiness” (2008).
This book is one of the most influential works regarding Behavioural
Economics, a new stream of economic theory which deals with the fact
that most people do not behave totally rational but also emotional and
sometimes irrational. The general idea of Libertarian Paternalism is
that it is possible to improve people’s (sometimes poor) choices by
nudging (i.e. softly push) them towards a socially desirable behaviour
whilst still allowing them to freely decide to act differently if they
want so.

In the following pages we want to give an overview of how this approach
can be applied to take care of public health. Summarising studies and
papers of four applications, we show that, thanks to Behavioural
Economics insights, there are many possibilities to improve public
health in ways that are easier to impose and more cost-saving than the
general public expects.

This canon is divided into four chapters. It commences with a brief
overview of the influence of manipulative advertisement and how the
state can nudge people towards a healthier lifestyle. In the second
chapter we discuss one of the most classic examples of Behavioural
Economics and public health – the possibility to increase organ
donations by imposing a default option so that every citizen is
automatically an organ donator. Following to that, we show what impact
monitoring of hospital employees on hygiene can have and how patient’s
choices at the doctors can be improved. Eventually, we emphasise on the
positive nudging effect smartphone apps and other devices can have to
promote healthier lifestyles and choices.

Nudging towards a healthier lifestyle 
=====================================

How can managers and policymakers direct individuals towards desired
outcomes? The following section will be an overview of several crucial
methodologies employed in behavioural economics to nudge people towards
a better lifestyle. In paricular the following concepts will be reviewed
with a brief analysis of respective applications: social norms,
salience, framing will be treated in the context of anti-smoking
policies, while priming and time-inconsistency will be considered
singularly.

One of the best known health related examples of how people can be
nudged is encouraging them to quit smoking. It is commonly known that
smoking is an unhealthy habit. Even though taxes on harmful substances
such as tobacco keep increasing, many smokers have been unable to quit
(Matjasko, Cawley, Baker-Goering & Yokum, 2016). In recent years,
researchers tried to apply different behavioural concepts to fight such
a problematic and widespread habit. Among the copious literature on the
subject, some very successful experiments were conducted by Parkes,
Greenhalgh, Griffin and Dent (2008), May et al. (2010) and Halpern et
al. (2015).

#### Social Norms.

The former conducted an experiment utilizing lung age of smokers as an
incentive for them to quit. Lung age was defined as the age of the
average healthy participant whose results of the lung test were equal to
the results obtained by the smoker. After carrying out a spyrometric
assessment (i.e. a pulmonary function test), the authors informed their
experimental subjects (smokers) of how old a non-smokers with equivalent
lungs conditions would have been. Emphasizing the lung age, rather than
the raw results of the test itself, significantly increased the
subjects’ probability to quit smoking. This result appears to be related
to the innate propensity of people to compare themselves with what the
other people do, or better, by comparing themselves with social norms.
In the previous example, the experimenters used the age in the test
results as an injunctive normative feedback to signal what the socially
approved – and healthy – behaviour is.

#### Salience.

May et al. (2010), on the other hand, conducted an experiment on the
effectiveness of salience in helping participant quit smoking. The
behavioural concept of salience revolves around the human propensity to
overestimate the likelihood of an event that is in some ways more
relevant to the individual (e.g. it has previously happened to someone
close to the individual and/or the individual him/herself has been in
some ways exposed to a reminder of the possibility of such an event). In
the aforementioned experiment, participants were shown a video in which
either they themselves, or one of their loved ones suffered from a heart
attack. The authors found out that three months later 50% of the
participants claimed to have quit smoking. As mentioned before, this is
a successful example of how the psychological principle of salience can
be used to nudge people towards healthier choices: through novel,
personally relevant, or vivid examples and explanations.

#### Framing.

Furthermore, Halpern et al. (2015) introduces gain-framed messages as a
way to make subjects quit smoking. As a general behavioural concept,
framing focuses on the way different possibilities are presented to
individuals and how appearances influence the subconscious in the
decision making process. The importance of framing is presented by
Matjasko et al. (2016). In this article, the authors stress the
different effects of framed messages that emphasise the positive effect
and those that underline the negative effects of a certain behaviour on
health. The former seems to be more effective in terms of prevention of
health issues while the latter work best when screening behaviour is
encouraged. Returning to the example on smoking, Helpern et al (2015)
tested the higher efficiency of gain-framed messages, i.e. messages
reporting the gains from quitting smoking, as compared to loss-framed
messages on a pool of 258 randomly assigned participants in a clinical
trial. The experimenters showed two different messages (videos and
paper) to two randomly assigned group: the first underlined the benefits
of quitting smoking, while the second focused on the problems related to
continuing with the bad habit. The results showed that among those who
completed a treatment to quit after being exposed to the message, a
significant majority belonged to the first group ( which was exposed to
gain-framed message).

#### Priming.

Another extremely important behavioural method to nudge people into
making healthier life choices is priming: using subconscious cues, it
directs the decision making process towards more socially desirable
actions. A particularly renowned experiment on priming was conducted in
school’s cafeterias in New York. There, in an effort to increase
students’ consumption of healthier foods, the Department of Health asked
Prof. Brian Wansink to research the percentage decrease in prices on
apple, oranges and other fruits that would have brought to a 5 percent
increase in consumption. Wansink discovered that the problem was not
(only) related to price tags, but also, and more importantly, to the
fashion in which such foods were presented in the cafeterias. Trying to
influence students’ subconscious, he displayed fruit attractively and
placed it prominently and in a few weeks its consumption increased by
54%.

#### Time-inconsistency.

Finally, a relevant problem in health economics is tied to
time-inconsistency in people’s choices. Behavioural Economics employs
commitment devices to help individuals to concentrate on their (desired)
objectives and to not give in to immediate (often unhealthy)
gratifications. A well known commitment device was proposed by Thaler
and Sunstein in their famous book *Nudge: Improving Decisions About
Health, Wealth , and Happiness*. The authors suggested that people might
be helped in their fight against temptation with a so-called deposit
contract: an individual will make a fixed deposit and its content will
be bound to the achievement of a predetermined goal. This commitment
device employs people’s loss-aversion to strengthen their willpower in
moments of weakness.

To sum up, Behavioural Economics has developed different methodologies
to help managers and policymakers in the field of health economics. The
criticism that comes with such tools are more than counterbalanced by
the perks of cheap, easy-to-apply and (generally) promptly effective
methodologies to nudge our society towards a desirable healthy future.

Defaults 
========

Nowadays, almost no supermarket chain offers a plastic bag to customers
when they check out. Customers in need of a bag are usually forced to
ask the cashier for one and/or to pay for it. In such scenarios,
customers are less likely to explicitly ask for a shopping bag, because
the default option, suggested by the cashier’s behaviour (i.e. no
plastic bag) is the status quo. Hence, it would require some effort to
deviate from the norm entailed in such a stable situation: losing the
status quo by buying a plastic bag might not be worth the gain (not
having to carry the groceries by hand) (Samson, 2014). This example on
daily life experience perfectly summarizes the concept of default
options: rules determining the set of actions to be undertaken if the
decision-maker fails to establish her/his preferred choice in a certain
situation. As already mentioned in the introduction, this section is
dedicated to the leading and most publicly recognized application of
default options: Johnson and Goldstein’s article on the impact of
default choices on organ donation compliance rates.

The article presents three different studies on the effects of opt-in,
opt-out programs (default choices) and programs that do not entail any
default choice on organ donations. All of these studies show that
opt-out programs, i.e. programs in which one has to specifically
register to stop being an organ donor, positively affect organ donations
by significantly raising the rate of compliance.In particular, the
authors carry out an analysis of the differences in organ donations
among European countries that is of incredible relevance. Within Europe,
the differences in organ donations are consistent even when checking for
relevant economic, social and political differences across nations.
However, countries in the Vieux Continent show different approaches to
the so called “no-action default” in organ donation, i.e. what action to
apply as a default when the citizen does not specify her/his own will.
In detail, two mechanisms are applied: states applying the
explicit-consent expect their citizen to specifically register to be
organ donors, while presumed-consent countries consider their citizen
organ donors unless they register not to be one. In the article, almost
60 percentage points separate the low rates of compliance to organ
donation in countries where the government applies an opt-in
(explicit-consent) mechanism from those countries where an opt-out
(presumed-consent) mechanism was established.

How can default options make such a huge difference? First of all, a
default choice helps people construct their own preferences about a
matter that is not usually subject of every day’s conversations with
friends and family. In addition, a default option might be seen as a
recommendation of action and therefore result in a smaller rate of
people opting out of the program. Moreover, the mechanism signals what
social norms expect from the individual: as in the case with shopping
bags, opting out implies a deviation from the status quo and the loss of
a stable state is, ceteris paribus, not compensated by an equivalent
gain, i.e. the individual has to have a strong dislike for organ
donation in order for her/him to decide to go against the default
option. Finally, people might prefer to stick with the inaction
associated with a stable state over putting not only psychological, but
also physical effort into changing a default option: in order to do so,
one has to deal with a lot of documents, public officers and several
time consuming tasks.

To conclude, the power of default options is evidently shown in the
paper presented. It is important to note that the utilization of this
mechanism as a way to nudge people’s decision should not be abused.
However, in a field such as organ donation, where thousands of people
around the world die yearly because they do not find a donor, the
implementation of an opt-out system leads to evidently greater benefits
than losses.

Monitoring and Feedback 
=======================

Health care is a field that has significant potential to utilize the
Behavioural Economics approach, one of whose leading applications is
monitoring and feedback. Monitoring and feedback programs contribute to
the improvement of health care services mostly through change in the
behaviours of either hospital staff or that of patients. The underlying
mechanism by which monitoring and feedback creates change in the
behaviour is *reactivity* and it says that people may change behaviour
when they are being observed (Orlowska, 1990). In fact, reactivity is
considered as a threat to the validity of behavioural observation as
Haynes and Horn (1982) suggest, because it will probably cause
modification in the behaviour of the subjects. However, in case of
monitoring as a method to improve health care services in the hospitals,
modification in the behaviour of subjects -i.e. hospital staff or
patients- is indeed, what is desired. Sykes (1978) explains the concept
of reactivity by introducing the concept of *observer’s effect*, which
is the change in the behaviour of the subject as a consequence of the
observer’s presence. In this part of the canon, the focus of interest
regarding the implementation of monitoring and feedback programs in
healthcare will be more about hospital staff’s behaviour and patients’
behaviour in attending their appointments. There are many studies aimed
at improving staff’s behaviour and accordingly service quality in
hospitals through implementation of monitoring and feedback mechanisms.
Analysing the effect of monitoring and feedback on hospital staff?s
behaviour regarding things like hand hygiene and surgical safety
checklists is a common practice, because these have huge consequences
for people’s health who visit the hospitals. Millions of people get
health care-associated infections in hospitals every year, which in turn
cause significant number of deaths. Hand hygiene, for example, is a
crucial factor in preventing health care-associated infections as
acknowledged by the WHO (Walker et al., 2014).

Armellino et al (2013) set up an experiment dealing with hand hygiene
compliance of the staff in hospitals. This study looks at the effect of
using RVA (Remote Video Auditing) in the surgical intensive care units
and feedback on the hand hygiene compliance rates of the hospital staff.
During a 4-week period of monitoring the staff via RVA, the hand hygiene
compliance rate on average was 30.42%. After the 4th week, real time
feedback was combined with RVA and in this post-feedback period hand
hygiene compliance rates exceeded 80% on average. It’s concluded that
RVA combined with feedback generated a significant and sustained
improvement in hand hygiene compliance rates (Armellino et al., 2013). A
very similar study conducted by Walker et al. (2014) assessing the
effectiveness of a new hand hygiene monitoring program also found out
that the program showed significant increase in hand hygiene compliance.
In addition to the compliance in hand hygiene, Overdyk et al. (2015)
carried out a study that evaluated the effect of remote video auditing
together with real time feedback on the compliance with the safety
processes such as surgical checklist. They too concluded that improved
efficiency and compliance to safety protocols can result from direct
observation, measurement and immediate feedback to the operation team
(Overdyk et al., 2015).

Another issue where feedback mechanisms are used in healthcare is
unattended appointments in hospitals. When patients do not keep up with
their appointments, this has serious costs for the hospital, since this
causes significant losses in revenues and decrease in the service
quality and patient satisfaction. A study conducted by Martin, Bassi and
Dunbar-Rees (2012), looking at the effect of certain methods on reducing
the number of missed appointments, concludes that the exposure to social
norms as the number of appointments that were attended, proved to be the
most effective method among others. This was basically done by
communicating on posters or on screens the number of patients who kept
up with their appointments in the previous periods. The exposure to
right norms functions in a way similar to feedback mechanisms and it
indeed reduced the number of missed appointments by 31.7% (Martin et
al., 2012).

Serious Games and Gamification 
==============================

Researchers in the field of healthcare recently started to work with the
idea that people’s behaviour could be directed towards the achievement
of a healthier lifestyle through the introduction of *gameful* designs
to complement traditional tools (McGonigal, J., 2011). The outcome of
such studies can be summarized using two concepts: serious games and
gamification. The former characterize the use complete games in non-game
situations, while the latter characterize the use of game elements in
non-game situations. Thanks to the exponential development of digital
technologies and the widespread use of the internet across the globe,
these concepts are often paired with that of mHealth (or eHealth), which
defines the integration of new technologies in the already existing
healthcare apparatus. In order to better explain such innovative, but
relatively fledgling concepts, the following section will propose two
applications. In detail, two articles will be discussed: the first part
of *Digital Games for Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes: Underpinning Theory
With Three Illustrative Examples* by Kamel Boulos et al. (2015) which
presents an example related to type 1 diabetes and *Just a Fad?
Gamification in Health and Fitness Apps* by Lister, C. et al. (2014), a
unique analysis of a sample of 132 applications related to physical
activity and diet on the Apple App Store.

#### Serious Games.

In the long list of chronic health conditions, type 1 diabetes is among
the best commonly known and most present in todays society. As it
generally appears in childhood or early teenage years, type 1 diabetes
is often difficult to monitor for both the individuals affected and
their parents. In particular, the routine required to deal with diabetes
implies a high degree of self-management and constant monitoring:
insulin shots have to be administered on a daily basis and patients have
to work to maintain a certain glycemic level in order to avoid long-term
complications. If on the one hand children find this routine grueling,
to say the least, on the other hand actual deterioration of
diabetes-related conditions commonly occurs as adolescence busts in. In
fact, teenagers start to self-manage insulin administration at a time
when they are most vulnerable to peer pressure in taking part in risky
activities and conforming to certain social standards. In such a
context, eHealth methodologies and devices seem as the best solution to
address the cumbersome situation faced by young diabetic patients. In an
article published on the Journal of Medical Internet Research Serious
Games in 2015, Kamel Boulos et al. review the effectiveness of the app
*Monster Manor* designed to help children aged 8 to 13 become more
self-aware and independent from their parents in dealing with their
condition. The app rewards kids when they input their glucose levels
with an in-game currency that can be spent to create monsters or access
different rooms. This is an example of a so-called *serious game*:
complete games which are employed for non-entertainment purposes
(Deterding, S. et al, 2011). In particular, serious games are actual
games which are used to engage and motivate people into effective and
positive behaviours.

#### Gamification

Another pivotal tool for the health app industry is *gamification*,
which differs from serious games in that it refers to the use of game
elements (not complete games) in non-game contexts (Deterding, S. et al,
2011). Therefore, gamification can be seen as the employment of the
addictive and stimulating components of games in positively reinforcing
people’s engagement and motivation towards more suitable lifestyles. As
in the previous case, the concept is generally applied through the
development of health applications and devices. That is why Lister, C.
et al. (2014) designate the Apple App Store as their “field” to study
gamification. In their renowned paper, the authors defined the backbone
of gamification in the health app industry employing six essential
components: peer pressure, digital rewards competition, leaderboards,
ranking and real-world prizes. Together with these elements they also
identify ten different game elements and thirteen health behaviour
constructs that are subsequently categorised into three main components:
*capability* (physical and psychological); *motivation* (automatic, i.e.
based on the simple pairing of a certain behaviour with a certain reward
and validation from a certain social sphere, or reflective, i.e. it
relates to the individual’s set of goals and beliefs in terms of
capabilities, risks and benefits associated with the tasks);
*opportunity/trigger*, social or physical, which starts the individual’s
positive change in behavior. Using simple linear regression methods, the
authors estimate the correlation between the different total and partial
constructed scores. In particular, the obtained results showed a notable
use of gamification principles paired with poor utilization of game
elements and exclusively motivational elements (instead of an all-round
behavioural health approach). As Cameron Lister underlined in a
subsequent interview in 2015 to *outsideonline.com*, even though
gamification techniques in the field of health are extremely promising,
there is still substantial lack of integration between game and
behavioural elements which go beyond the fun and addiction. In the same
interview, Lister praises the app *Zombie’s Run!* which add more texture
to the usual running application by introducing a story: as the name
suggests, users are chased by zombies during their routine morning run.

All in all, the use of serious games and gamification of eHealth is
indeed one of the biggest promises of the health care sector, not only
because of the increasing magnitude of the health app industry (in 2014,
Apple alone paid 9 billion dollars to developers in the US market), but
also in terms of actual efficacy. With the rise of healthcare
information and the constant growth of the use of smartphones, the
development and progress in this field could (and hopefully will) be
pivotal in increasing people’s health and lifestyle.

Conclusion 
==========

Although the discipline is facing many criticism in terms of ethicality
and long-term efficacy, the aim of this canon is to demonstrate the
positive goals that can be achieved applying Behavioural Economics to
the field of Public Health.

Throughout this paper, readers were presented with ways to nudge people
towards a more suitable lifestyle (quitting smoking, eating healthier
food and strengthening their willpower), tools to allow public
administrations all over the globe could radically reduce the issues
related to low rates of organ donation, means for hospitals to increase hand
hygiene among their staff and young patients with type 1 diabetes to learn how to monitor and self-manage their condition.
Such a list of achievements seems stately and somewhat utopian. It
should be, therefore, apparent that the simplicity, efficacy and
inexpensiveness of behavioural methodologies in reaching those goals is
revolutionary. People have proven to be remarkably responsive to frames
and vulnerable to defaults and social norms. This allows libertarian
paternalistic policies to provide potential remedies to many of the
problems faced in the healthcare sector at relatively lower costs.

However, there is still much to be done in order to fully integrate
behavioural concepts into policymaking and management. In addition,
researchers should address the ethical problems related to behavioural
techniques such as default options, monitoring etc., in order to render
this discipline more welcome by the public. Furthermore, human behaviour
is complex and somewhat unpredictable: even though behavioural
techniques seem simple to apply, much care should be put in the way they
are carried out and on their effects on the environment.

To conclude, Behavioural Economics and Public Health seem as an
incredibly functional match and further research should be executed in
order develop and subtilize the range of possible applications. It is
difficult to determine certain limits for Behavioural Economics
applications to healthcare. We think that there will be space for new
applications in new areas of healthcare to the extent to which people’s
behaviors can be positively influenced and society as a whole can be
*softly pushed* towards a greater future.


References 
==========

* Armellino, D. et al. (2013). Replicating changes in hand hygiene in a surgical intensive care unit with remote video auditing and feedback. *American Journal of Infection Control*, 41(10), 925-927

* Beresini, E. (2015). Fitness Isn’t a Gam, But It Should Br: The buzzword gives old tricks a new name. *Outside* Retrived from: https://www.outsideonline.com/2029846/fitness-isnt-game-it-should-be .

* Blumenthal-Barby, J.S., & Burroughs, H. (2012). Seeking better healthcare outcomes: the ethics of using the “nudge”. *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 12(2), 1-10

* Deterding, S., et al. (2011). Gamification: Toward a Definition *In CHI 2011 Gamification Workshop Proceedings (2011)*

* Haynes S.N., & Horn W.F. (1982). Reactivity in behavioral observation: A review. *Journal of Behavioral Assessment*, 4(4), 369-385

* Heron, K.E., & Smyth, J.M. (2010). Ecological momentary interventions: incorporating mobile technology into psychosocial and health behaviour treatments. *British journal of health psychology*, 15(1), 1-39

* Johnson, E.J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). Do Defaults Save Lives?.*Science*, 302(5649), 1338-1339

* Kamel Boulos et al. (2015). Digital Games for Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes: Underpinning Theory With Three Illustrative Examples *JMIR Serious Games 2015;3(1):e3* Retrived from: https://games.jmir.org/2015/1/e3/ .

* Lister, C. et al. (2014). Just a Fad? Gamification in Health and Fitness Apps *JMIR Serious Games 2014;2(2):e9s* Retrived from: http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e9/ .

* Martin, S.J., Bassi, S., & Dunbar-Rees, R. (2012). Commitments, norms and custard creams – a social influence approach to reducing did not attends (DNAs). *Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine*, 105(3), 101-104

* Matjasko, J.L., Cawley, J.H., Baker-Goering, M.M., & Yokum, D.M. (2016). Applying Behavioral Economics to Public Health Policy: Illustrative Examples and Promising Directions. *American Journal of Preventive Medicine*, 50(5 suppl 1), 1-12

* McGonigal, J. *We don’t need no stinkin’ badges: How to re-invent reality without gamification.* Presentation at GDC 2011. Retrived from: http://goo.gl/9a6ka .

* Orlowska, D. (1990). Staff reactivity to observation. *The British Journal of Mental Subnormality*, 36(71), 125-131

* Overdyk, F.J. et al. (2015). Remote video auditing with real-time feedback in an academic surgical suite improves safety and efficiency metrics: a cluster randomised study. *BMJ quality & safety*, 0, 1-7

* Parkes, G., Greenhalgh, T., Griffin, M., & Dent, R. (2008). Effect on smoking quit rate of telling patients their lung age: the Step2quit randomised controlled trial. *British Medical Journal*, 336(7644), 598-600

* Samson, A. (2014, February 25, ). *A simple change that could help everyone drink less*. Retrieved from https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/consumed/201402/simple-change-could-help-everyone-drink-less

* Sykes, R. (1978). Toward a theory of observer effect in systematic field observation. *Human Organization*, 37(2), 148-156

* Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). *Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness*. Yale University Press

* Voyer, B.G. (2015). ‘Nudging’ behaviours in healthcare: Insights from behavioural economics. *British Journal of Healthcare Management*, 21(3), 130-135

* Walker, J.L. et al. (2014). Hospital hand hygiene compliance improves with increased monitoring and immediate feedback. *American Journal of Infection Control*, 42(10), 1074-1078

#Behavioural Economics: Libertarian Paternalism and Public Health
##### Canon - Applied Economic Anaylsis I, Tilburg School of Economics and Management

######By Yvonne Jamar, Carolina Sant’Ana Oliveira, Sandra van der Schaaf, Florian Schmidt, Zeynep Tanca and Francesca Ventimiglia

####ABSTRACT

*Public health is a matter of great concern for politicians and legislators around the world: not only does it take up a relevant slice of a nation’s public budget, but it also deeply affects citizens’ quality of life. The behavioural economics approach of libertarian paternalism largely contributes to the already substantial literature on this matter. In the following canon, we give an overview of the aforementioned contributions by presenting the most important examples of practical applications. These include experiments on nudging people towards healthier lifestyles as well as articles on better schemes for organ donation and topics as the improvement of hygiene in hospitals.*

####INTRODUCTION

How can we make people quit smoking? Which way is the best to increase the number of organ donators? Why are so many people unable to cope with choices concerning their health – and is it possible to improve their decisions? These questions are just a few out of many politicians and health managers permanently face when considering new regulations and policies regarding the system of public health. Doubtlessly, there are plenty of ways to answer them. The paper at hand tries to give an insight how the approach of Behavioural Economics and Libertarian Paternalism can help to deal with these issues.

Libertarian Paternalism is a term introduced by US economists Richard Thaler and law professor Cass Sunstein in their well-known bestseller “Nudge – Improving decisions about health, wealth and happiness” (2008). This book is one of the most influential works regarding Behavioural Economics, a new stream of economic theory taking into account that most people do not behave totally rational but also emotional and sometimes irrational. The general idea of Libertarian Paternalism is, that it is possible to improve people’s (sometimes poor) choices by nudging (i.e. softly push) them towards a (socially) desirable behaviour whilst still letting them the freedom to decide differently if they want so.

On the following pages we want to give an overview of how this approach can be applied to take care of public health. Summarising studies and papers of four applications, we show that there are many ways to improve public health by the insights of Behavioural Economics and that most of them are way easier to impose and cost-saving than many people expect.

This canon is divided into four chapters. It commences with a brief overview of the influence of manipulative advertisement and how the state can nudge people towards a healthier lifestyle. In the second chapter we discuss one of the most classic examples of Behavioural Economics and public health – the possibility to increase organ donations by imposing a default option so that every citizen is automatically an organ donator. Following to that we show what impact monitoring of hospital employees on hygiene can have and how patient’s choices at the doctors can be improved. Eventually we emphasise on the positive nudging effect smartphone apps and other devices can have to promote healthier lifestyles and choices.

####NUDGING TOWARDS A HEALTHIER LIFESTYLE

The traditional persuasion messages are starting to show their limited impact on health decisions and therefore, insights from behavioural economics are becoming more and more relevant in healthcare management (Voyer, 2015).

One of the best known health related examples of how people can be nudged is encouraging them to quit smoking. It is commonly known that smoking is an unhealthy habit. And even though the taxes on harmful substances such as tabacco keep increasing, many smokers have been unable to quit (Matjasko, Cawley, Baker-Goering & Yokum, 2016). Parkes, Greenhalgh, Griffin and Dent (2008) conducted an experiment where they used the lung age of smokers as an incentive for them to quit. Lung age was defined as the age of the average healthy participant whose results of the long test was equal to the result of the smoker. The authors found that emphasizing the lung age, rather than the raw results of the test, significantly increased the probability for smokers to quit. This result might me related to the effect of social norms. Blumenthal-Barby and Burroughs (2012) mention the “Charm Project” in the UK and the “Most of Us Wear Seatbelts” campaign in Montana. Respectively, lifestyle and exercise choices of participants were compared with those of peers to incentivize them towards a healthier lifestyle, and people were reminded that 85% of the population wear seatbelts, which resulted into a significant increase in the reported use of seatbelts.

Another method that was found to be effective in making people stop smoking is through salience and affect (Blumenthal-Barby & Burroughs, 2012). Participants were shown a video in which they or one of their loved ones suffered from a heart attack. Three months later, 50% of the participants claimed to have quit smoking. This effect is based on people being sensitive to novel, personally relevant, or vivid examples and explanations. Other health enhancing applications of this method are depicturing food that corresponds to the amount of calories burned while exercising and stating the amount of calories per dish on menus.

Unhealthy food consumption can also be reduced by priming (Blumenthal-Barby & Burroughs, 2012). This method makes use of subconscious cues that influence the decision making process. For instance, in a school cafeteria, fruit consumption went up 54% when it was displayed attractively and placed prominently. And, after handing out smaller food containers in an all-you-can-eat environment, people will consume less. Simply asking people about their health habits, like flossing or eating fast food, nudged them toward healthier choices as well. Another kind of primer is a reminder to make healthier choices. Examples are reminding people to exercise and plan their screening appointments (Blumenthal-Barby & Burroughs, 2012). Matjasko et al. (2016) state the importance of framing. That is, framing messages about a certain behaviour or treatment in a way that emphasizes the positive effect on health are more effective when it concerns the prevention of health issues. When a message is framed in such a way that the negative effects on health are emphasized, screening behaviour is encouraged. Blumenthal-Barby and Burroughs (2012) found a higher effectiveness of messages aimed at young adults, when they feel similar to the messenger.

Another possibility is to supply people who have time-inconsistent preferences with commitment devices (Matjasko et al., 2016). Such consumers find themselves giving into temptations, instead of living the healthy lifestyle they desire. A commitment device proposed by Richard Thaler is a deposit contract, which will only give back the deposit if the predetermined goal is reached. Research has found that the completion of more weeks of exercise can be accomplished by nudging people to make commitments for a longer term (Matjasko et al., 2016).

####OPT-IN VS OPT-OUT

Nowadays, in almost every supermarket chain, cashiers do not offer a plastic bag to customers when they check out. Customers in need of a bag are usually forced to ask for one and/or to pay for it. In such scenarios, customers are less likely to explicitly ask for a shopping bag, as the default option, the one suggested by the cashier’s behaviour, i.e. no plastic bag, is the status quo. Hence, it would require some effort to deviate from the norm entailed in such a stable situation and losing the status quo by buying a plastic bag might not be worth the gain (not having to carry the groceries by hand) (Samson, 2014). This example on daily life experience perfectly summarizes the concept of default options: rules determining the set of actions to be undertaken if the decision-maker fails to establish her/his preferred choice in a certain situation. As already mentioned in the introduction, this section is dedicated to the leading and most publicly recognized application of default options: Johnson and Goldstein’s article on the impact of default choices on organ donation compliance rates.

The article presents three different studies on the effects of opt-in, opt-out programs (default choices) and programs that do not entail any default choice on organ donations. All of these studies show that opt-out programs, i.e. programs in which one has to specifically register to stop being an organ donor, positively affect organ donations by significantly raising the rate of compliance. 

In particular, the authors carry out an analysis of the differences in organ donations among European countries that is of incredible relevance. Within Europe, the differences in organ donations are consistent even when checking for relevant economic, social and political differences across nations. However, countries in the Vieux Continent show different approaches to the so called “no-action default” in organ donation, i.e. what action to apply as a default when the citizen does not specify her/his own will. In detail, two mechanisms are applied: states applying the explicit-consent expect their citizen to specifically register to be organ donors, while presumed-consent countries consider their citizen organ donors unless they register not to be one. In the article, almost 60 percentage points separate the low rates of compliance to organ donation in countries where the government applies an opt-in (explicit-consent) mechanism from those countries where an opt-out (presumed-consent) mechanism was established. 

How can default options make such a huge difference? First of all, a default choice helps people construct their own preferences about a matter that is not usually subject of every day’s conversations with friends and family. In addition, a default option might be seen as a recommendation of action and therefore result in a smaller rate of people opting out of the program. Moreover, the mechanism signals what social norms expect from the individual: as in the case with shopping bags, opting out implies a deviation from the status quo and the loss of a stable state is ceteris paribus not compensated by an equivalent gain, i.e. the individual has to have a strong dislike for organ donation in order for her/him to decide to go against the default option. Finally, people might prefer to stick with the inaction associated with a stable state over putting not only psychological, but also physical effort into changing a default option: in order to do so, one has to deal with a lot of documents, public officers and several time consuming tasks.

To conclude, the power of default options is evidently shown in the paper presented. It is important to note that the utilization of this mechanism as a way to nudge people’s decision should not be abused. However, in a field such as organ donation, where thousands of people around the world die yearly, because they do not find a donor, the implementation of an opt-out system leads to evidently greater benefits than losses. 

####MONITORING AND FEEDBACK

Health care is a field that has significant potential to utilize the behavioural economics approach, one of whose leading applications is monitoring and feedback. Monitoring and feedback programs contribute to the improvement of health care services mostly through change in the behaviours of either hospital staff or that of patients. The underlying mechanism by which monitoring and feedback creates change in the behaviour is “reactivity” and it says that people may change behaviour when they are being observed (Orlowska, 1990). In fact, reactivity is considered as a threat to the validity of behavioural observation as Haynes and Horn (1982) suggest, because it will probably cause modification in the behaviour of the subjects. However, in case of monitoring as a method to improve health care services in the hospitals, modification in the behaviour of subjects -i.e. hospital staff or patients- is indeed, what is desired. Sykes (1978) explains the concept of reactivity by introducing the concept of “observer’s effect”, which is the change in the behaviour of the subject as a consequence of the observer’s presence. 

In this part of the canon, the focus of interest regarding the implementation of monitoring and feedback programs in healthcare will be more about hospital staff’s behaviour and patients’ behaviour in attending their appointments. There are many studies aimed at improving staff’s behaviour and accordingly service quality in hospitals through implementation of monitoring and feedback mechanisms. Analysing the effect of monitoring and feedback on hospital staff’s behaviour regarding things like hand hygiene and surgical safety checklists is a common practice, because these have huge consequences for people’s health who visit the hospitals. Millions of people get health care-associated infections in hospitals every year, which in turn cause significant number of deaths. Hand hygiene, for example, is a crucial factor in preventing health care-associated infections as acknowledged by the WHO (Walker et al., 2014). 

One of the studies dealing with hand hygiene compliance of the staff in hospitals is a study  conducted by Armellino et al (2013). This study looks at the effect of using RVA (Remote Video Auditing) in the surgical intensive care units and feedback on the hand hygiene compliance rates of the hospital staff. During a 4-week period of monitoring the staff via RVA, the hand hygiene compliance rate on average was 30.42%. After the 4th week, real time feedback was combined with RVA and in this post-feedback period hand hygiene compliance rates exceeded 80% on average.  It’s concluded that RVA combined with feedback generated a significant and sustained improvement in hand hygiene compliance rates (Armellino et al., 2013). A very similar study conducted by Walker et al. (2014) assessing the effectiveness of a new hand hygiene monitoring program also found out that the program showed significant increase in hand hygiene compliance. In addition to the compliance in hand hygiene, Overdyk et al. (2015) carried out a study that evaluated the effect of remote video auditing together with real time feedback on the compliance with the safety processes such as surgical checklist. They too concluded that improved efficiency and compliance to safety protocols can result from direct observation, measurement and immediate feedback to the operation team (Overdyk et al., 2015).

Another issue where feedback mechanisms are used in healthcare is unattended appointments in hospitals. When patients do not keep up with their appointments, this has serious costs for the hospital, since this causes significant losses in revenues and decrease in the service quality and patient satisfaction. A study conducted by Martin, Bassi and Dunbar-Rees (2012), looking at the effect of certain methods on reducing the number of missed appointments, concludes that the exposure to social norms as the number of appointments that were attended, proved to be the most effective method among others. This was basically done by communicating on posters or on screens the number of patients who kept up with their appointments in the previous periods.  The exposure to right norms functions in a way similar to feedback mechanisms and it indeed reduced the number of missed appointments by 31.7% (Martin et al., 2012).

####GAMIFICATION

With the outstanding use of smartphones, tablets, laptops and all devices that provide internet, it is not hard to imagine that all kind of services would be available in the e-world. One of the most important services that has been influenced by the internet is the health care area. A new term was raised and is now becoming very popular; it is the e-health, which characterizes everything related to health care and computers. The internet has revolutionized the traditional healthcare, opening several opportunities to consumers, firms and governments to benefit from it. Never before consumers were advertised with so many information about health care and medicines. Consumers now have the chance to learn more in an easier and faster way. Firms and health insurances can benefit from it, receiving more feedbacks and acquiring more consumers. In addition, governments have now the possibility to use new approaches in order to stimulate healthier life styles of its citizens.

A promising application of Behavioural Economics that involves both computer devices and healthcare is the use of gamification of e-health. Gamification means the use of games on non-games situations, also known as health-monitoring devices when concerned to health. These devices can be found in distinct ways. They can provide information about users’ training, functioning as speed sensor, calorie counter, heart rate monitor, etc. They can also work as medical laboratory at home, measuring the level of glucose, level of testosterone, Vitamin D, etc. Going beyond the provision of information about users, these devices can inform about the quality of the air, which ingredients are in each meal, whether a food is fresh or not, etc. In addition, health-monitoring devices can create competitions among users, making it possible for users to share their training performances and goals. In other words, through these new devices, for instance FitBit, Garmin and Apple Watch, users have better and more ways to monitor their health status, having real-time feedbacks about their trainings and health behaviours.

From the entire possibilities that resulted from gamification, it is possible to incorporate several Behavioural Economics principles. By means of monitoring and real-time feedback, the users can be nudged towards better decisions. The feeling of being observed and the stimulation of receiving real-time feedback change the users’ behaviour. Furthermore, users very well accept health-monitoring devices, once it provides them with short and long-term objectives, motivating and increasing users’ commitment.

A much-mentioned study in this field is Smyth and Heron (2010). The authors aim to present and criticize the use of mobile technology to improve health behaviours and psychological and physical symptoms. The study consist of a base of twenty-seven mobile technology interventions to deliver ambulatory treatment on patients with smoking cessation, weight loss, anxiety, diabetes management, eating disorders, alcohol use, healthy eating and physical activity. The article emphasizes that mobile-technology devices have a positive effect on treating health behaviours and that the patients very well accepted them.  

The use of gamification of e-health is indeed one of the biggest promises of the healthcare sector. With the rise of healthcare information and the constant growth of the use of smartphones, the acceptance of gamification tends to be even higher than it is nowadays. Moreover, the youth claims to a fun and dynamic relationship between health and health devices.

#####REFERENCES

Armellino, D. et al. (2013). Replicating changes in hand hygiene in a surgical intensive care unit with remote video auditing and feedback. *American Journal of Infection Control*, 41(10), 925-927

Blumenthal-Barby, J.S., & Burroughs, H. (2012). Seeking better health care outcomes: the ethics of using the "nudge". *The American Journal of Bioethics*, 12(2), 1-10

Haynes S.N., & Horn W.F. (1982). Reactivity in behavioral observation: A review. *Journal of Behavioral Assessment*, 4(4), 369-385

Heron, K.E., & Smyth, J.M. (2010). Ecological momentary interventions: incorporating mobile technology into psychosocial and health behaviour treatments. *British journal of health psychology*, 15(1), 1-39

Johnson, E.J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). Do Defaults Save Lives?. *Science*, 302(5649), 1338-1339

Martin, S.J., Bassi, S., & Dunbar-Rees, R. (2012). Commitments, norms and custard creams – a social influence approach to reducing did not attends (DNAs). *Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine*, 105(3), 101-104

Matjasko, J.L., Cawley, J.H., Baker-Goering, M.M., & Yokum, D.M. (2016). Applying Behavioral Economics to Public Health Policy: Illustrative Examples and Promising Directions. *American Journal of Preventive Medicine*, 50(5 suppl 1), 1-12

Orlowska, D. (1990). Staff reactivity to observation. *The British Journal of Mental Subnormality*, 36(71), 125-131

Overdyk, F.J. et al. (2015). Remote video auditing with real-time feedback in an academic surgical suite improves safety and efficiency metrics: a cluster randomised study. *BMJ quality & safety*, 0, 1-7

Parkes, G., Greenhalgh, T., Griffin, M., & Dent, R. (2008). Effect on smoking quit rate of telling patients their lung age: the Step2quit randomised controlled trial. *British Medical Journal*, 336(7644), 598-600

Samson, A. (2014, February 25, ). *A simple change that could help everyone drink less*. Retrieved from https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/consumed/201402/simple-change-could-help-everyone-drink-less

Sykes, R. (1978). Toward a theory of observer effect in systematic field observation. *Human Organization*, 37(2), 148-156

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). *Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness*. Yale University Press

Voyer, B.G. (2015). ‘Nudging’ behaviours in healthcare: Insights from behavioural economics. *British Journal of Healthcare Management*, 21(3), 130-135

Walker, J.L. et al. (2014). Hospital hand hygiene compliance improves with increased monitoring and immediate feedback. *American Journal of Infection Control*, 42(10), 1074-1078
